## Summary
In modern times, biblical study has been challenged by a variety of criticla methodologies. This critical study of the BIble began with historical and textual criticism of the authorship of the books of the Bible. In the 19th/20th centuries, what came to be categorized as higher criticism developed. Four recent influential types include form criticism, redaction criticism, reader-response criticism, and canonical criticism. Although biblical-critical methods may be usedful tools to study of the Bible, if they are based on natural presuppositions instead of supernatural ones, they can result in a misunderstanding of the biblical message. A second concern is how adequately religious language expresses that message. Religious languages often transcends sensory experience. To the modern mind, which seeks empirical verification, this kind of language may seem unsatisfactory. It is true that religious language may not be subject to direct verificaiton, but religious language can be cognitively meaningful, through a broad system of synthesis. 

## The Nature of Biblical Criticsm
1. Textual criticism is the attempt to determine the original text of the biblical books, by comparing the various extant manuscripts
2. Literary-source criticism is the effort to identify the various literary sources on which books of the bible are based or from which they derive.
3. Form criticism is the endeavor to get behind the written sources of the bible to the period of oral tradition, and to isolate the oral froms that went into the written sources. insofar as this attempts to trace the history of the tradition, it is known as tradition criticism
4. Redaction criticism is a study of the activity of the biblical authors in shaping, modifying, or even creating material for the final product that they wrote
5. Historical criticism in a sense employs all of the above and draws on the data of archaeology and of nonbilical historical sources. it has as its aim the determination of the authorship and date of hte biblical books, and the establishment and interpretation of what actually occurred historically
6. Comparative-religions criticism assumes that all religions follow certain common patterns of development. It explains the history of the Judeo-Christian faith in terms of these patterns. a common assumption in this endeavor is that religions develop from polytheism to monotheism
7. Structural criticism attempts to investigate the relationship between the surface structure of the writing and the deeper implicit structures that belong to literature as such. these implicit structures are the formal literary possibilities with which the author must work
8. Reader-response criticism regards the locus of meaning not as the text, but the reader. the reader creates the meaning, rather than finding it there. consequently, attention is concentrated on the reader rather than the text

### Form Criticism
* get bhind the written sources to determine the growth of the tradition in the preliterary or oral period

#### Background
* by 1900, source critics had reached something of a consensus regarding the gospels. Mark was believed to have been written first, and Matthew and Luke were thought to have depended in their writing on Mark and another source referred to as "Q", believed to have been made up, to a large extent, of Jesus's sayings. in addition, Matthew and LUke were each thought to have relied on an independent source of material unique to the particular gospel. initially referred to as special Matthew and special Luke
* there was a growing conviction, however, that behind these written documents were oral traditions. form criticism represented an attempt to get at these oral forms and trace the history of their development.

#### Axioms of Form Criticism
* Jesus's stories and sayings were first circulated in small, independent units. on careful examination, the chronological and geographical transitions between many of the stories in the gospels are seen to be vague, and are assumed to be the work of an editor trying to fit the stories together in some osrt of coherent form. the gospels also present some of the same incidents in different settings. this bears out the view that the evangelists had stories before them "like a heap of unstrung pearls" that they strung together in a way that seemed to make good sense
* these self-contained units or elements of material found in the Gospels can be classified according to their literary forms. this tenet is based on the observation that the oral traditions and literary works of primitive cultures follow comparatively fixed patterns and occur in a few definite styles. there are the sayings (parables, proverbs, prophetic/apocalyptic utterances, legal prescriptions, and "I" words) and also stories ("Apothegm stories" provide a historical setting for a saying or pronouncement of Jesus, miracle stories, legends resemble the tales or fragments of tales concerning saints or holy mena and women in both christian and non-christian traditions, myths are literary devices used to convey a supernatural or transcendent truth in earthly form)
* once classified, the various units of Gospel material can be stratified, or arranged in terms of their relative ages. from this, the historical value of various types of Gospel untis can be determined. the earlier the material, the more historically reliable or authentic it is. if we know the general processes and paterns that oral traditions follow, it will be possible to ascertain at what stage a certain element is likely to have entered. this is particularly true if we know at what time specific influences were present in the community preserving and transmitting the tradition. 
    * the parables themselves are likelier to go back to Jesus's own sayings than are the explanations and moralizing applications, which probably represent the work of the church serving as interpreter
    * some miracles (healing and exorcisms) are considered typically "Jewish," and therefore from an early period of the church. the so-called nature miracles, such as the stilling of the waters and teh cursing of hte fig tree, reflect the HEllenistic interest of a later period. arising from the earlier period, the former are likelier to be authentic than are the nature miracles
* the setting in life of the early church can be determined. a careful study of hte gospels will reveal t us the problems faced by the early church, affecting the form of hte tradition. specific words of Jesus were preserved in order to deal with the needs of the church. in some cases sayings may even have been created and attributed to him for this purpose. what we have therefore in the gospels is not so much what Jesus said and did, as what the church preached about him. most critics considered the gospels more like sales/promotional literature than like carefully controlled research bulletins

#### Values of Form Criticism